+++
title="Finding what matters"
date=2025-04-18
[extra]
summary="A piece of advice for new PhD students"
+++

So we all know advice is cheap---or free, as in this case---but nevertheless I
humbly offer you what I wish someone had told me when I started out. Take from
it what you find resonant and leave the rest, I don't mind. And as always, my
perspective is limited to my particular field.

A PhD student's most important decision is ultimately who their advisor is going
to be. A significant part of graduate school flows from this one decision and
there is already a lot of advice out there about how to go about the process
which I won't repeat. Rather, I'd like to talk about what happens next, about
what the work looks like.

My general advice is this: figure out which parts of the research process matter
to you and are non-negotiable for your happiness. If your advisor is great, but
you like neither the topic of the work nor the actual process of it, then you
are still going to be miserable.

For some people, topic is very important to them and it doesn't entirely matter
what they're doing as long as they working in a particular area. For my part, I
am interested in many things[^topics-i-hate] but care a lot about the *methods*.
I like writing code and designing systems and it turns out I won't be happy if
the work doesn't involve a healthy amount of this. Interesting theory and types
are great, but only if I actually get to apply them. I am a bit of a "hacker",
in the non-intrusive sense. I similarly like collaborating with people, even if
we're not working on exactly the same thing. The lone scientist narrative, if
such a thing is even possible, simply doesn't suit me.

My initial advising match in graduate school ultimately was unsuccessful because
while I was interested in the topic, the methodology simply didn't work for me.
It made me completely miserable. I can do mathematical proofs and analysis, but
it's a slog which doesn't make my brain sing. Simply put, I was a bad fit for
the particular project. But it took me a long time to realize why I wasn't
happy.

I think it can be easy to overlook the *work* and focus on the person the work
is with---which is undeniably important---but the work is what you'll be doing
day to day to day to day for many many years. Ideally that would aid your
flourishing rather than impede it.

**So figure out what matters to you. What do you need to be happy doing research?**
Do you need collaborators or to work solo? Do you care deeply about a particular
topic or do many things pull your interest? Do you need to write code? To write
proofs and formal semantics? Would writing C make you miserable? The list goes
on and on.

Take some time and talk to yourself. Introspection is never wasted.

[^topics-i-hate]: Not to say that there are no topics I would refuse to work on;
    there are many. Blockchains and LLMs can rot for all I care, as can anything
    designed to brutalize or kill people. The list is long, for the tech
    industry collaborates with a great many evils and grows many news ones.
