+++
title = "Colophon"
date = 2025-01-09
template="simplepage.html"
+++

aka: about this website!

## Intentions / Goals
This website is my little home on the web, repository for my work, and the place
where I will generally put my ramblings. Unless prevented by external forces, I
will always make my papers available here free of charge in the "publications"
section.

## Tools
This website is built with [Zola](https://github.com/getzola/zola) using the
[Hyde](https://github.com/getzola/hyde) theme (originally made for Jekyll). I
have made a fair number of tweaks here and there so if something looks wonky
please assume it's my fault rather than that of the theme itself. I am very much
not skilled at web design.

## Hosting and Tracking
I currently host this site using github pages. While I am not doing any tracking
I don't know for certain that github isn't and so cannot promise that there is
no tracking/logging happening.

## AI Disclaimer
I do not and will not use any generative AI tools in my writing. Unfortunately,
I happen to rather like semicolons and em-dashes; you'll probably see them come
up in my writing. However, you may rest assured that whatever text you read on
this site---minus that of papers for which I have co-authors---comes entirely
from my own mind, for better and for worse. Likewise, I do not endorse or use
images generated by these tools.

## Contributions
Since this is my personal site, I am not accepting external blog posts, not that
anyone would feel tempted. However, if you spot an error/typo please do inform
me via one of the contact methods listed!
